Welcome to the first room of the Computer Fundamentals module! Before we can talk about security, we need to first understand what we are securing. Consider the following analogy:
Before protecting a castle, we need to know the layout of the castle: where the treasure room, the food storage, and the commander's quarters are. We need to know who enters and how they enter the castle. Also important is who can enter these rooms and take or put treasure or food, for example.

The bottom line is: Trying to defend what you don't understand is like defending a castle you have never seen.
In this room, we will explore our "castle". We will cover what a computer is, its building blocks, and how they are connected. After completing this room, you will have a general idea of how the components of a computer system interact with each other to provide services to its users. Don't worry about too much technical jargon or depth; we'll take this nice and easy and focus on the fundamentals.


Step 1: Press the Power Button

When we press the power button on our computer system, a signal is sent to the PSU to allow power to flow. Imagine our body being powered off when we sleep. Once we wake up and receive oxygen, our body starts pumping blood and boots up.

Step 2: Firmware starts
Continuing our analogy from step 1, once the body has started up, our core components are up and running, but our brain is not yet conscious. Like our bodies, a computer system contains firmware that allows all its components to start up. The central system that manages this is called the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI). Note: We will often see the term BIOS mentioned instead of UEFI. BIOS does the same as UEFI, but has mainly been replaced by UEFI

Step 3: Power-On Self Test
Now that our body is up and running, it is time to test if everything is functioning as it should. If something isn't, there will be some alarm signals. One of the routines that the UEFI loads is the Power-On Self Test, which tests if every required component is present, configured correctly, and functioning.

Step 4: Select Boot Device
Once our body is up and running, configured correctly and fully functional, our system searches for the location of our bootup routine to start our consciousness. In our computer system the UEFI holds an ordered list which prioritizes on which device to look first for the boot up routine for the Operating System.

Step 5: Initiate Bootloader
Now that our system knows the part of our brain where our consciousness is located, it initiates the "load routine" to start it. Our computer systems follow a similar process: On the selected boot device, the bootloader is initiated. This bootloader transfers the Operating System from the selected boot device to the Random Access Memory. Once the OS is transferred, the UEFI gives control over the different components to the OS.

Now that we know how a computer system boots, let's have a little exercise. Open the static site in this task by clicking the green "Static Site" button and follow the instructions to answer the question below.



We have covered the core components of a computer system and how it boots up. At the moment, you won't realize this, but further on, when learning cyber security concepts, you will often need to recall the function of each of these core components and how they interact with each other. The boot process is a very important concept later on, as it is sometimes targeted by hackers.

Now that we know the insides of a computer, the next step is to see how the different combinations and specializations of these components lead to diverse types of computer systems. Continue to the next room Computer Types (coming soon) to find out.
